---
layout: post
title: "A Ballet Dancer's Review of Alice's Adventures in Wonderland Ballet"
description: "A dance review of a live screening of a ballet"
category: "ballet"
---
{% include JB/setup %}


A Ballet Review of *Alice's Adventures in Wonderland*
=====================================================

Note: This review will most certaiinly have plot spoilers.

I went to a screening of a ballet performance on Tuesday evening. I saw this one [here](http://static.roh.org.uk/showings/alices-adventures-in-wonderland-live-2014/en.pdf) at a movie theater. It is possibly the most hyped ballet in years and for good reasons: its the first new ballet in 20 years of the history of the Royal Ballet Company and since its debut in 2011, the ballet has gained worldwide attention for its musical direction, choreography, sets, and costumes. Just about every major news site with an arts&performance section has reviewed this. I hope to add to this increasingly large pile of ballet reviews from a crtical ballet dancer's perspective.

Personally, I hardly ever and rarely listen to music. However, I do make rare and extraordinary exceptions. Joby Tolbot's original musical score for *Alice's Adventures in Wonderland* is the perfect soundcape for this ballet: its playfully upbeat and romantic notes capture the childlike quality of the story. This musical score has unexpectedly stuck with me; I've listened to the soundtrack many hundreds of times. I've watched the dance clips from the previous performances by ROH; I somehow have learned all the names of the principal dancers.

The production has truly lived up to its hype.

The ballet offers a fresh perspective on the well-known story of a teenage girl who adventures into Wonderland. The first scene is in a garden party with an assorted mix of family friends. There, Alice and her new love interest (a family servant) are immediately introduced to each other; they dance a pas de deux. The advantage of seeing this production on a screen is that the facial expressions of the characters are so easy to read. It's easy for a ballet dancer to critique on the technical execution of the ballet choreography from solos to formations, all of which, from a classical view of ballet, are very well-executed standard (but not remarkable) combinations of very standard ballet figures. What most of the audience remembers is not the height of a jump or the number of fouettés that were done by any one dancer but instead the acting, the storyline, the costumes. Technical execution may only account for just 20-30% of the audience's enjoyment of a ballet production, the rest is all acting and artistry and performance.

I like the story-telling device of introducing all the party guests in the first scene and then having each of them appear as different characters and costumes in Wonderland. Lewis Carolll is a photographer in the garden party. Later, he is also the White Rabbit who pulls Alice into the rabbit hole and then makes occasional appearances throughout her journey into Wonderland. Alice's mother, an uptight Victorian-era woman, forbids the house servant boy/Alice's crush from seeing Alice. Then in Act 3, her mother appears in Wonderland as the high strung, highly feared Red Queen who happens to enjoy executing her subjects on a whim. The love interest/servant boy in the first scene re-appears as the Knave of Hearts in a striped costume of reds and whites in Wonderland. Every principal or soloist dancer plays at least two different characters and must covince spectators that they're playing different characters.

For those who are new to ballet, *Alice's Adventures in Wonderland* deviates from most classical ballet performances that have been performed for over a century. Most classical perforamncs feature 100% ballet, as you would expect. The *Alice* ballet features non-ballet, including tap dancing scene and a puppetry scene. Both are nice dance styles that make the characters that much more complete. The Mad Hatter is actually a mad tapper who does a tap dance with a off-beat rhythm. There are also far fewer formation dances in *Alice* compared to the more most classical performances. The formation dances are well-executed; dancers did complicated combinations while in fantastical costumes. I'm impressed with Wheeldon's new choreography. The choreography **fits** each character so well. When Alice and her lover are dancing a pas de deux in the first scene, I do not see two principal dancers on the stage, I see two remarkable lovestruck children.

The scenes and costumes were colorfully whimiscal. The first formation dance is done on a stage that resembles the ink-filled pages of a massive book. The Mad Hatter's tea party includes lots of interesting details: a small stage is surrounded by giant metal spoons, there's a human-sized teacup. The Mad Hatter is in a fabulous pink-green three-piece suit and giant top hat. A formation dance in Act 3 features a deck of playing cards: corps de ballet dancers with tutus that are in the shape of playng cards; they wear hats in the shape of numbers. Now I wish I have a hat shaped exactly like the number "2"! The setttings are very true to the original story (except the ending scene). The first scene starts off in 1860 London, while the final scene is set in 2014 Oxford (yay spoiler alert!). Modern-day Alice wakes up from her dream about Wonderland; she was previously (ironically) reading the book **Alice in Wonderland** on a college campus before she fell asleep. And we see her boyfriend (Frederico Bonelli) dancing a pas de deux with her and doing jumps in jeans and a T-shirt. Wearing restrictive clothing while performing ballet dance steps in the air is really difficult! The execution was well-done. The modern-day setting is a convenient narrative device to enable Alice to get together with her childhood crush since she can't do so in either Victorian England or in Wonderland.

Every character has a strong stage presence. Alice (Sarah Lamb as principal dancer) is charismatic, radiating joy and curiousity. The Red Queen (Zenaida Yanowksy) is very fun to watch. Yanowsky is an talented actress; her dynamic Red Queen is comical in her narcissism and delusions of grandeur. Her pas de deux is a spoof of the famous Rose Adagio pas de deux in which the Red Queen dances with four male servants who are all jitterlingly nervous and fearing for their lives. This is acting and dancing combined in the best quality. Her choreography is intentionally awful; she falls and trips over the steps and her dance partners. The Mad Hatter (Steven McRae) delivers a quirky well-executed performance as a tap dancer; I'm impressed with the playfulness of the rhythm and timing. Tap dancing happens on a very fast tempo. The fact that the dancers were on time to such fast music was also impressive. I especially like the consistent references to a clock ticking in the Mad Hatter's dance with the Doormouse, Hare, and Alice, but howeer, the dance sequence was a minute longer than it should have.

The atmosphere of childlike playfulness is in every scene and every musical note. You won't find outstanding classical-like technical excellence in which the ballerina does 20 fouettés in one sitting or see a dancer do extraordinary multiple jumps in the air for the sake of pure classical art. And that's not the point of this production. This is the first ballet I've been to where people are *actually* laughing because the scenes are so delightful. That rarely or never happens in a full-length classical ballet; I hardly see any comedy in most full-length classial ballet. Kudos to the entire production team on executing so well on bold ideas. Definitey a must-watch ballet, even if you are not a fan of ballet.
