---
layout: post
title: "Impressions of SFBallet's Saturday company class"
description: ""
category: "ballet"
---
{% include JB/setup %}


Impressions of SFBallet's Company Class
===================================

As part of Bay Area Dance Week full of free classes, dance parties, and rehearsal viewings, SF Ballet opened its doors to the public for a viewing of its Saturday morning company class. I do not know of any other professional ballet company that allows public viewings of company classes, so folks from the Bay Area are definitely lucky to get a chance to attend this company class that happens at the start of the day for all professional ballet dancers. I'm not sure if their company class normally takes place on the stage itself or in a large rehearsal studio; for this event, the company class was on full view at the stage. I'm especially impressed by how SF Ballet is making ballet appeal to newcomers to the dance form from tweeting discounts on Twitter, to hosting demos of pointe shoes, and hosting events like [Sensorium](https://www.sfballet.org/events/sensorium).

Long lines were at the entrance doors when  I entered the opulent grand lobby. There was a table where several principal dancers sat for signing autographs and taking selfies; I managed to get signatures on my lookbook of dancer profiles. Hilariously, the lady in front of me opened a page of a dancer's photo profile on her lookbook, presented it to the dancer in front of her, and was politely greeted with "You're close, but that's not me. I'm on the page before this one." I'm sure a good number of people don't recognize the dancers in-person, at SFBallet, they seem approachable at the lookbook signings.

While waiting for the doors to open, I met the Costume Director at a demo table who explained how the basics of custom-made tutuse and answered people's questions on cost of tutus (upwards of $50k)! All the production tutus that appear on stage are hand-sewn by skilled artisans at specialized costume shops and easily run into the thousands of dollars. The practice tutus, which are used by female dancers in rehearsals and are all machine made, can run into the hundreds of dollars. Female professional dancers use up pointe shoes within 3 days, pointe shoes are up to $1,000 a pair, and provided by the ballet company. While the costumes for men are of course also hand-sewn, the cost of ballet materials is a lot higher for female dancers compared to the male dancers because of the cost of pointe shoes.

I was in the orchestra section seated about 40 rows from the front stage. Like any ballet class, the dancers went through a series of plies, tendues, followed by coup de pieds, the usual. Every movement was aligned correctly and very precise. At the highest level, even a tendues is infused with ethereal elegance. The class was a warmup for the matinée and the evening performance of Romeo and Juliet. I spotted Mathilde Froustey (former dancer of Paris Opera Ballet), Yuan Yuan Tan (international superstar dance prodigy), Pascal Molat (dancing in barefoot for the class!), Tilt Helimet, Dores André, and many others that I should probably have recognized. The dancers seem not at all perturbed that they are like zoo animals on the grand stage being observed by the curious public. I was expecting a poster sign "Do not feed the dancers" to emphasize this. When the time came for grand batments and developés, the audience gasped at the full extensions, the elegant lines, and the speed at which they all memorized and executed combinations flawlessly. This was dancing looked like on a world class level. All the dancers were in the same class from corps de ballet members to principals.

The ballet master Christopher Stowell demonstrated a combination with hand gestures just once and the dancers followed the combination. When Stowell mentions that pirouettes must be done at this part of the combination, all the dancers opted to do up to four, or even up to six, pirouettes in one single clean movement as easily as breathing. As expected for professional dancers, everyone was capable of doing full leg extensions in all directions. After a combination, sometimes Stowell corrected a dancer on technique. Each combination, as typical for a ballet class, got more complicated and required more difficult extensions and finally the center movement began halfway through the class. I was looking forward to center exercises, which is when all the female dancers put on their pointe shoes, and they all did such complicated movements really well, and since everyone is musical, the center combinations loooked so impressive when done in sync with a group. The grand allegros were majestic with large extended lines and port de bras. The combinations in the center involved many changes in directions, correct and precise placement of heads and arms that I'm surprised that all the dancers were able to keep up so easily. A few times, I notice that even if a dancer forgot a step, they would pause, get in position, and then execute the next movement without getting in anyone's way. At one point after a group of dancers did a combination with gravity-defying jumps, Stowell shouted at them, "Why are you working so hard?!"

At SFB, the dancers are all very different, they're from different schools and countries and ethnicities. The fact that everyone's from a different school shows in the subtle way that one dancer points his toe in relation to his knee in a passé and the height of the arabasque to the minute differences in the placement of the arms in second position or first position, all the way to the interpretation of the music counts. Everyone is so unique in also their height and variations in body type, they all bring a different perspective to the table.

The atmosphere was genuine, everyone was being themselves, wearing indivdual practice clothes (seems like there are no formal practicewear requirements). The audience was so polite, being utterly silent while the class took place. When finally Stowell announced, "It's time for us to say goodbye to the audience", and everyone in the audience applauded loudly as the curtains dropped. The live piano music played in the background while the dancers executed the next combination hidden from view. The audience was speechlessly impressed. Outside, a long line of ticket holders were waiting for the opening of the Saturday matinée performance of Romeo and Juliet.
